---
title: Genealogies of the colonial present (guest post)
date: 2016-11-17 13:43 UTC
author: Jeroen Adam
tags:
---

<article class="article">
  <header class="title">
    <h1>GENEALOGIES OF THE COLONIAL PRESENT (guest post)<br>
<span class="sub">The rediscovery of the local in conflict management interventions in Mindanao,
the Southern Philippines</span>
</h1>
  </header>
  <footer class="date">
    <time datetime="11/17/2016">By Jeroen Adam November 2016</time>
  </footer>
  <div class="line">&nbsp;</div>
  <div class="body">
    <p>The past decade, a growing critique has been formulated on a post-Cold
War project of ‘liberal peace’. As argued by scholars such as (amongst others)
Oliver Richmond and Mark Duffield, an interpretation of state fragility as a
breakdown or an anomaly, gave rise to an intervention strategy which is obsessed
about re-building the ideal-type of ‘Western’ liberal state, characterized by an
impersonal bureaucracy, private property rights and open markets. Among the most
prominent of the critiques against this dominant paradigm of the liberal peace,
is the argument that these interventions start from a universal blueprint as
they do not take into account culturally and historically specific understanding
of state, peace, reconstruction… Hence, these projects consistently try to
impose an artificial socio-political formation in varying contexts in most of
the world that is not adapted to local contexts and is also not considered as
legitimate by the population. As a result, as these scholars argue, these
interventions based on the ideology of the liberal peace are inevitably bound to
fail. 
</p>
  <p>As an alternative to these universalist and top-down pretensions of state
building and post-conflict reconstruction efforts in many places of the world,
the concept of the ‘local’ has gained increasing prominence. One example of this
so-called local turn can be found in a much-cited paper by Boege et.al.  As an
alternative to this dominant liberal peace model, these authors suggest that
historically grown native institutional configurations need to be endorsed. In
the view of Boege et.al., these institutional configurations primarily consist
of ‘kin-based and other traditional networks’ which will then interact with
formal state configurations. In their view, one hereby will witness the
emergence of a specific form of hybrid state formation which is supposedly more
sustainable and legitimate. In a largely similar manner, Oliver Richmond links
the increasing prominence of the local with the emergence of a new type of
social contract in projects of state building. As he argues, a true hybridity
will hereby emerge as: ‘The top down will trickle down to the bottom, and the
bottom-up will then engage in a democratic process, which will bring to life a
social contract in classic liberal fashion’.
</p>
<p>In my paper entitled, ‘Genealogies of the colonial present. The rediscovery
of the local in conflict management interventions in Mindanao, the Southern
Philippines’, I put forward some critical questions concerning this place of
‘the local’ as an alternative against the universalist pretensions of liberal
peace interventions. These questions are based on an analysis of peace building
interventions that I have been studying the past years in a set of provinces in
Muslim Mindanao, the Philippines. This region has been subject to violent
conflict since the late sixties as a Muslim rebellion for independence/autonomy
erupted against the Christian dominated Philippine nation-state. Largely in line
with what has been described above, a set of international organizations have
hereby explicitly made a ‘local turn’ in their peace building strategies. The
argument hereby is that classic peace negotiations between rebel groups and the
Philippine government at the national level need to be combined with conflict
management and peace building interventions at the micro-level of society. This
micro-level harbors a set of culturally and religiously defined institutions,
organizations and agents presumably having a much stronger local societal
embeddedness. Through this social embeddedness, these fora are then better
suited for tackling a subnational conflict scale where a range of localized
issues are at the root of the majority of violent incidents. Second, this is
based on an assessment which considers formal state institutions as weak in these conflict-affected regions, in
particular in those regions which have witnessed the persistent presence of
armed groups the past decades. As formal state institutions are considered to be
weak, it almost becomes an inevitability to work through a set of existing
informal practices, groups and agents in attempting to reach peace. </p>
<p>
My assessment of this local turn is not based on a question whether these
interventions are efficient or not. Rather, I start my analysis from a different
angle in my paper. Rather than accepting the argument that the need of working
through these local institutional configurations is a major innovation against
classic models of peace building and state building, I point out that there is
hardly anything new about this. Already in the American colonial period, an
agenda of pacification through indirect rule was being deployed wherein
customary institutions and authorities obtained a central role as proxies of the
colonial regime. Secondly, the authoritarian Marcos regime (1972-1986) deployed
a strategy wherein traditional authorities and institutions have been
deliberately integrated in a counterinsurgency effort to quell the rise of
Muslim armed groups fighting for autonomy/separatism. Interestingly,
traditional, kin-based or religious institutions have hereby been partially
converted into formal law. It is these same institutions that are witnessing a
revitalization through the active involvement of a set of international
organizations the past 10 years. At least in the case of Muslim Mindanao, rather
than a reaction and alternative to liberal peacebuilding, the current discovery
of the local should be understood as some sort of ‘colonial present’ wherein
colonial and post-colonial strategies of pacification through indirect rule are
being reinvented. </p>
<p>Lastly, by pointing at the prominent place these kin-based institutions and
customary authorities have obtained throughout the colonial regime and the
authoritarian Marcos-era, some fundamental questions can be put forward about
the democratic credentials of this ‘local turn’ in current peace building
interventions. Put simply, in their drive to push for a post-liberal agenda of
state reconstruction and peace building, a set of authors and (inter)national
organizations do not systematically take structural power imbalances at this
local scale into account. Too easily, ‘the local’ is considered to be a sphere
expressing the voices of subaltern agents against a hegemonic West. The local is
hereby being approached in a very loose and homogeneous way and structural
class-, gender- or generational differences within these subaltern, non-Western
populations is a subject that is not accounted for; despite some loose warning
not to romanticize this local arena. The local becomes a space devoid of
internal politics. As cogently pointed out by David Chandler in his review on
the local turn in peacebuilding, a real ‘political agent of emancipatory social
change’  is hereby missing and has to make place for vague notions about the
local as a space of resistance, legitimacy, agency… It is exactly this logic of
pacification through indirect rule that can be termed as the colonial genealogy
in the current local, post-liberal turn in peace building studies.</p>
<p>This blog piece is a summary of the article: Adam, J. 2016. Genealogies of
the colonial present. The rediscovery of the local in conflict management
interventions in Mindanao, the Southern Philippines. Conflict, Security and
Development, Conflict, Security & Development, 16 (5): 1-18.</p>
<h2>References</h2>
<p>Boege V., Brown A., Clements K. and Nolan, A. 2008. On Hybrid Political
Orders and Emerging States: State Formation in the Context of ‘Fragility.
Berghof Research Center, Berlin.
(<a class="underline" href="http://edoc.vifapol.de/opus/volltexte/2011/2595/pdf/boege_etal_handbook.pdf">http://edoc.vifapol.de/opus/volltexte/2011/2595/pdf/boege_etal_handbook.pdf</a>)</p>
<p>Chandler, D. 2011. ‘The Uncritical Critique of Liberal Peace’. In A Liberal
Peace. The Problems and Practices of Peacebuilding, ed. Susanna Campbell, David
Chandler and Meera Sabaratnam. Zed Books, London, 174-190.</p>
<p>Duffield, M. 2007. Empire, Development and Colonialism. The Past in the
Present. Woodbridge, Currey.</p>
<p>Richmond, Oliver P. 2009. ‘Becoming Liberal, Unbecoming Liberalism:
Liberal-Local Hybridity via the Everyday as a Response to the Paradoxes of
Peacebuilding’. Journal of Intervention and Statebuilding 3 (3), 324-344.</p>
  </div>
</article>

