---
title: notes on historiography
date: 2016-09-22 08:55 UTC
author: Nida Alahmad
tags:
---

<article class="article">
  <header class="title">
    <h1>NOTES ON HISTORIOGRAPHY*</h1>
  </header>
  <footer class="date">
    <time datetime="9/22/2016">By: Nida Alahmad September 2016</time>
  </footer>
  <div class="line">&nbsp;</div>
  <div class="body">
<p>Upon the US-led invasion and occupation of Iraq in 2003 and within few weeks of the initiation of insurgent actions in Iraq, the Pentagon held a screening of the Battle of Algiers. The flier to the screening read, “How to win a battle against terrorism and lose the war of ideas. Children shoot soldiers at point-blank range. Women plant bombs in cafes. Soon the entire Arab population builds to a mad fervor. Sound familiar? The French have a plan. It succeeds tactically, but fails strategically. To understand why, come to a rare showing of this film.” (<a class="underline" href="http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/07/weekinreview/the-world-film-studies-what-does-the-pentagon-see-in-battle-of-algiers.html">NYT</a>). The film was also screened in some independent cinemas in the US just as the insurgency in Iraq started escalating. The screening of a 1966 Film signaled an interest in learning about and from history, at least by some at the Pentagon and the concerned citizens who flocked to the cinemas. Now we know that the cautionary description in that flier could have easily referred to Iraq during the short months that followed the occupation, raising questions about learning from history and the limits of this exercise. One ought to emphasize that there were many contestations within the US administration on how to approach the intervention in Iraq based on knowledge about the country and its past. The rifts between the State Department on one hand and the Department of Defense and the White House on the other are documented by many, including the <a class="underline" href="http://www.sigir.mil">Office of the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction</a> in its report <i>Hard Lessons</i>.</p>
<p>At the same time, this little episode raises a number of other questions regarding history: how it is told and by whom, the different meanings that we attach to it, how it is/ could be re-written, re-told and appropriated. These acts of (re-) narrating, making and appropriating history are never, as is clear in the Iraqi case, restricted to one group of people. They are performed constantly, with varying effects and power, by states, ordinary people, scholars, politicians, institutions, among many other possible actors.</p>
<p>The US occupation came in to Iraq with a declared intention of transforming the country’s historical trajectory and turning it into a liberal democracy that thrives on an open market system. It did so through orders and regulations as well as policies that were either introduced by the occupation authorities, or later through developmental projects. It is not a revelation to say that Iraq’s historical trajectory has taken a dramatically different turn after the occupation.</p>
<p>
<p>Revisiting the past and what has been written (or not) on it cannot be more critical. There are many good historical works that were published on Iraq over the years, reviewing them is beyond the scope of this post. The main concern here to raise some questions on the role that historiography can play in our current writing and thinking on Iraq.</p>
The US project to re-write Iraq’s history was not only aimed at the making of the future, but also the re-writing of the past. One of the first orders of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) was the that of de-ba’thification (<a class="underline" href="http://www.iraqcoalition.org/regulations/20030516_CPAORD_1_De-Ba_athification_of_Iraqi_Society_.pdf">Order 1, May 2003</a>), which resulted in a massive dismissal of civil servants and hollowing the massive state bureaucracy of many experts who carried with them institutional memory. Among those civil servants were historians and other educators in Iraq’s cultural and educational institutions. While de-ba'thification was later amended and many of its actions reversed, its disruptive effect cannot be ignored and its extent outside the military institutions (where many of those dismissed joined the ranks of militant and insurgent groups) is yet to be documented. Another policy which tried to actively re-write the past was the US-funded efforts of new educational curriculum that revisited, among other things, Iraq’s modern history. While it seems that the impact of this effort has been limited, its stated intentions remain significant in terms of the ambitions of re-writing Iraq’s history and identity through text books (see <a class="underline" href="http://files.umwblogs.org/blogs.dir/4059/files/2010/11/Encyclopaedia-Final-Proofs-09.pdf">Nabil Tikriti's work</a> for more details). This moment prompted some historians and social scientists to look into the writing (and re-writing) of Iraq’s modern and contemporary history. Among them were Jordi Tejel, Peter Sluglett, Riccardo Bocco and Hamit Bozarslan, who co-edited a book which examines working with Iraq’s history from a number of angles given the new realities of post 2003 Iraq, <i>Writing the Modern History of Iraq: Historiographical and political challenges</i>.</p>
<p>In their book, the authors take seriously a number of important questions that face any serious inquiry into the country's present and past and the construction of its future. They point out the different possibilities and difficulties that would emerge from the deepening divides within Iraqi society since 2003 along ethnic, sectarian and regional lines. How these divides produce pronounced multiple histories which may lead to a “fragmentation of a national memory.” What kind of victimization discourses would emerge from Iraq and how we can understand them as part of a universal phenomenon of such discourses? The toppling of the Ba'thist state, de-ba'thification and the trials of the former regime members would alter the ways in which we understand the history of the Ba'thist era, but in what ways? The authors present very challenging and stimulating discussions regarding the political role that writing about Iraq's present and past takes and how it performs historical moments of fragmentation and unification of national narrative(s)</p>
<p>
A particularly "troubled" period in terms of what has been produced about it is the late 1970s through 2003. This trouble is due to a number of reasons including lack of access to primary sources, travel restrictions to and from Iraq, and the proliferation of works that promoted political agendas at the expense of academic rigor. In 1991 Marion Farouk-Sluglett and Peter Sluglett noted that writings about Iraq, even during the monarchical era of 1921-1958, have suffered from lack of access to primary sources and limits on academic freedom: archives within Iraq were often difficult to research due to limits on academic freedom, Iraqi scholars within Iraq suffered from travel restrictions and limits were imposed on foreign researchers. As such, most writings were concerned with political and diplomatic histories (like the ones that Farouk-Sluglett and Sluglett produced). There were also writings that focused on questions of political economy, such as Isam al- Khafaji’s work on the Iraqi rentier state. Others were mainly promoting political agendas, among them those of the regime and its opposition. While noting the emergence of scholarship that reproduced the official state narrative on Iraq, Farouk-Sluglett and Sluglett praise Makiya's <i>Republic of Fear</i> – a book that can also be seen as producing a counter-narrative, but one that, like the state’s narrative that it attempts to reject, is a totalizing master narrative of the Ba’thist era which now proved to be not only simplistic but also dangerous. One of the few exceptions on this period, especially in terms of its ability to produce new material, is Joost Hiltermann’s book on the Iraqi use of chemical weapons during the Iraq-Iran war, <i>A Poisonous Affair</i> — a carefully written account that benefited from the author’s access to Iraq during his work with human rights organizations.</p>
<p>
Many things have changed after the US invasion, including our understanding of the relevance of certain narratives, especially those on communal and national identities and the legacies of previous eras since the British Mandate, in shaping the politics of Iraq and the more basic issue of access to research material. As pointed out by discussions in Tejel e al's edited volume, a revisit of previous scholarship (such as Makiya's and others who wrote on tribalism for example) is necessary if we were to produce a reflexive and responsible scholarship that does not simply serve immediate policy needs. While limits on academic freedom are officially lifted, academics face many dangers in Iraq from militant groups and the sporadic but constant violence. Many archival materials in Iraq were lost or destroyed and some were moved to Stanford University. The surviving archives, access to oral histories and the emerging memoirs, already proved to help produce new writings on Iraq: such as the works of Joseph Sassoon and Fanar Haddad on the Ba'thist period, and Dina Rizk-Khoury on memory and the Iran-Iraq war.</p>
<p>
Thirteen years have passed since the Pentagon screening of The Battle of Algiers. The US occupation has come to an end (but not its effects), Iraq witnessed the first civil war in its modern history (2006-07), and the Arab Spring stormed the region with a destructive force the ramifications of which are still unfolding. This is also a moment when the past is being constantly reinterpreted and appropriated, like the Pentagon's appropriation of a film produced by Italian communist and Algerian anti-colonialists, to learn about counterinsurgency. It is thus a moment where careful and critical historiography is called for. In 2010 a group of Iraq experts asked how can we understand Iraq's present through the works of one of the best students of Iraq’s modern history: Hanna Batatu. Batatu's classic study The Old Social Classes and the Revolutionary Movements in Iraq: A study of Iraq's Old landed and Commerical Classes and of its Communists, Ba'thists, and <i>Free Officers</i> was published in 1978 and came back to print in 2004. Due to his unprecedented access to police archival material, now lost and/ or destroyed after the 2003 invasion, Batatu was able to produce one of the most detailed and immaculate works on Iraq’s social classes and the Iraqi Communist Party (and to a lesser, but still impressive, extent, the Ba’th Party). The edited volume Uncovering Iraq: Trajectories of Disintegration and Transformation visits a number of currently pressing questions about Iraq through Batatu's legacy: the civil war of 2006-07, sectarianism, political Islam, and questions on “artificiality” of the Iraqi state and national identity. The depth of Batatu’s class analysis helps the authors dissect formulas that are currently being contested and reified in the public realm and de-essentialize them (especially questions of political identities). A message from the final chapter of the book seems to be an appropriate place to end this post. Chris Toensing points that the first drafts of Iraq’s post-2003 history were written by the floods of US journalists who went to Iraq and reported on it (or on the US presence in it), wrote on it, claimed expertise on it and along the way contributed to the writing of the country’s new history. Their stories cannot be ignored or dismissed as (only) simplistic, which for the most part they are. But because they have, like all other narratives before them and after them, performed parts of Iraq’s current history and are now part of it.</p>
<p><small>*I would like to thank Simon Jackson and Chris Toensing for reading an earlier draft of this piece. This post is more nuanced than it would have been because of their comments and critical insights. All mistakes are mine.</small></p>
  </div>
</article>

